## 2024

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Nathalie Vialanaix**, DR INRAE Castanet-Tolosan, unité MIA-T. *Méthodes à noyaux pour l'intégration de données hétérogènes*.</span> <a name="Vialanaix2024"></a> 

The substantial development of high-throughput biotechnologies has rendered large-scale multi-omics datasets increasingly available. New challenges have emerged to process and integrate this large volume of information, often obtained from widely heterogeneous sources. In this presentation, I will make a brief review of popular data integration methods and then focus on kernel methods and why they are usually well suited to this task.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Sylvain Foissac**, CR INRAE Castanet-Tolosan, unité GenPhySE. *Feuilles en bas, racine en haut : les arbres en maths  (ou Comparaison de dendrogrammes pour la génomique 3D)*.</span> <a name="Foissac2024"></a> 

La conformation tridimensionnelle du génome dans le noyau de la cellule joue un rôle important dans la régulation de l'expression génique. La technologie de capture de conformation chromosomique à haut-débit (Hi-C) permet de caractériser l'organisation spatiale du génome pour divers échantillons biologiques. Or, si des pipelines bioinformatiques permettent de traiter les séquences Hi-C pour produire des matrices d'interactions associées à chaque échantillon, il reste à développer des méthodes d'analyse comparative statistiquement fiables et computationnellement efficaces. Nous présentons ici une nouvelle méthode d'analyse comparative de données Hi-C basée sur une transformation de matrices en dendrogrammes par clustering hiérarchique contraint et sur une comparaison de groupes de dendrogrammes.


<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Théo Gauvrit**, doctorant à l’Institut Magendie, Inserm, Bordeaux:  *Etudes précliniques sur l’Autisme: quels outils pour analyser et modéliser des données complexes ?* </span> <a name="Gauvrit2024"></a>

A travers le cas d’études précliniques sur l’autisme, nous mettrons en évidence la capacité de simple outils d’analyse et de modélisation à extraire de l’information à partir de données complexes de neurosciences sur différentes échelles. Nous montrerons d’abord comment l’activité à l’échelle du neurone seul peut jouer un rôle déterminant dans la transmission de l’information sensorielle, et notamment dans le modèle murins de l’autisme que nous étudions où nous observons une plus grande variabilité de l’acivité neuronale. Nous verons ensuite comment les nouvelles méthodes d’enregistrement de l’activité à l’échelle de la population neuronale en combinaison avec une tache comportementale, produisent des données complexes qui permettent d’aller encore plus loin dans l’étude des mécanismes physiologiques impliqués dans la perception sensorielle atypique dans notre modèle de l’autisme. Deux concepts clés émergent dans ce type d'étude : l'encodage du stimulus dans l'activité neuronale et le décodage de l'activité neuronale en un comportement de réponse de l'animal. Nous illustrerons comment les outils de machine learning et de deep learning modernes sont essentiels pour caractériser ces processus.

## 2023

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Célia Biane**, post-doctorante à National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Control, INRIA, DYLISS:  *Réseaux biologiques : des systèmes dynamiques Booléens à la neuroscience expérimentale.* </span>  <a name="Biane2023"></a>

Les modèles dynamiques Booléens de réseaux de signalisation et de transcription ont été utilisés ces dernières années pour modéliser les cellules tumorales et prédire des cibles thérapeutiques dans le Cancer. Des limitations majeures de l'application plus généralisée de ce type d’approche incluent d'une part, l'étape de construction des modèles qui est actuellement faite par des experts de la biologie moléculaire du cancer à partir de curation manuelle de la littérature, ce qui en fait un processus long, dépendant du modélisateur et difficilement reproductible et d'autre part, le développement de méthodes algorithmiques performantes permettant de réaliser des prédictions à partir des modèles. Au cours de ce séminaire, j'aborderai successivement la reconstruction de modèles biologiques Booléens à partir de données biologiques de type omiques (données moléculaires), de méthodes de reprogrammation du comportement dynamique des systèmes Booléens et de l'application de ces méthodes à la découverte de cibles thérapeutiques dans le cancer.

Dans une seconde partie, j'introduirai des concepts issus des neurosciences et présenterai des résultats publiés récemment portant sur les propriétés intégratives des neurones cérébelleux.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Clément Agret**, Université de Lille: *RedOak, indexation de génomes similaires.* </span>   <a name="Agret2023"></a>

Dans ce séminaire, il vous sera présenté RedOak, un outil hautement parallélisé, basé sur un découpage en k-mers et développé en C++ avec Open MPI. RedOak est conçu pour l'indexation de génomes similaires.  
Serons également introduites des structures d’indexations et des méthodes de compression utilisées pour répondre au problème de l’indexation d’une large collection de génomes similaires. 
Enfin, je vous partagerai mon parcours professionnel et les défis que j'ai rencontrés lors de la conception et de la mise en œuvre de RedOak. 
Venez donc découvrir comment RedOak ou plutôt les k-mers peuvent participer à accélérer la recherche dans le domaine de la génomique. Comme par exemple faire une philokmerie de données de SARS-CoV-2.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Georgeta Bordea**, Ingénieur de recherche à l'Université de La Rochelle, Laboratoire L3i: *L'extraction de relations biomédicales supervisées à distance avec une application dans les interactions aliment-médicament et plante-médicament.* </span> <a name="Bordea2023"></a>

Motivée par la quantité considérable de publications scientifiques générées par la recherche biomédicale, l'extraction d'informations permet d'accélérer la découverte de connaissances à partir de données textuelles. Cependant, la création de grandes quantités de données annotées pour l'apprentissage automatique peut être très chronophage et coûteuse. Pour contourner cette limitation, la supervision à distance est une technique qui utilise des bases de connaissances existantes et des ontologies pour générer automatiquement des étiquettes pour des données non annotées. Dans cette présentation, nous aborderons en particulier les interactions médicamenteuses avec les aliments et les plantes. Nous discuterons d'une approche automatisée pour la construction d'un corpus spécifique à un domaine. Enfin, nous examinerons les perspectives de l'extraction d'informations supervisées à distance pour faciliter l'interprétation et la traduction des données omiques.


<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Nicolas Tourasse**, laboratoire ARNA, INSERM, Bordeaux: *Annotation of sequence and structure of RNAs from type I toxin-antitoxin systems.* </span>  <a name="Tourasse2023"></a> 


Toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems are genetic loci consisting of two genes: a gene coding for a toxic protein that leads to death or growth arrest of the host cell producing it, and an antitoxin that counteracts the toxin. TA loci are widespread in bacterial and archaeal genomes, including those of pathogens. Type I TA (T1TA) systems are a class of TA systems where the antitoxin is a noncoding antisense small RNA (asRNA) that inhibits expression of the toxin by directly base-pairing with the toxin mRNA.
TA systems are studied for numerous aspects including RNA and protein structure and function, regulation of gene expression, and cell physiology. They may also represent potential targets for new antimicrobial strategies. We recently developed a genetic method based on a life and death selection, called FASTBACT-Seq, which combines deep mutagenesis with deep sequencing followed by statistical analysis, to allow the identification of toxicity suppressors. Applying FASTBACT-Seq to T1TA systems of the human gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori and the model organism Escherichia coli we identified nucleotides that are essential for the transcription, translation, or activity of the toxins. We also discovered single-nucleotide substitutions that affect the structure or stability of the toxin mRNA. The method thus provides nucleotide resolution of key structural and functional determinants of T1TA systems.
Only a few T1TA systems have been experimentally characterized, while hundreds have been identified by means of bioinformatic analyses based solely on the toxin protein sequences. However, it is essential to have an accurate annotation of the complete mRNA and asRNA molecules to understand the co- and post-transcriptional regulation of T1TA systems, which is determined by RNA sequence and structure. Therefore, we recently developed the first database dedicated to type I TA systems, named T1TAdb, that includes RNA information. We devised a bioinformatic procedure to annotate the mRNA and asRNA coordinates based on key determinants of the mRNA structure and the genetic organization of the T1TA loci. Besides RNA and protein secondary structure predictions, T1TAdb also identifies promoter, ribosome-binding, and mRNA-asRNA interaction sites. It also includes tools for comparative analysis, such as sequence similarity search and computation of structural multiple alignments, which are annotated with covariation information. The database is freely available at [link](https://d-lab.arna.cnrs.fr/t1tadb).

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Maxime Lecomte**, doctorant dans l’équipe Pléiade INRIA, Bordeaux: *Numerical and reasoning-based metabolic modelling of bacterial communities.* </span>  <a name="Lecomte2023"></a> 

Microbial communities are governed by complex networks of interactions, possibly mediated by the production and consumption of metabolic goods. Identifying the potential for cooperative - metabolite cross-feeding - or competitive behaviours - consumption of metabolites by several species - is a promising avenue for characterizing microbiomes.
Numerical models, such as Flux Balance Analysis, are suitable for describing and predicting complex cellular mechanisms at the genome-scale, and at the scale of small communities. A part of my research work was to apply and develop such methods to undertand the metabolic dynamics of a cheese bacterial community composed of two lactic acids bacteria and one propionic bacterium. We used a multi-omics strategy to validate the predictions of our model. While this approach works well in deciphering both bacterial interactions and intracellular mechanisms, it can hardly scale to larger ecosystems such as those observed in nature. In contrast, reasoning-based modelling can predicting the metabolic potential of bacteria at large scale while addressing the combinatorics of their putative interactions. A second part of my work goes further with this paradigm as I model more precisely the potentials for cross-feeding and competitive interactions in microbial communities. This is implemented in a tool that was benchmarked on artificial microbial communities and compared to state-of-the-art numerical modelling approaches. 
Overall, these two works illustrate that the need to find a trade-off between scalability and accuracy is crucial for analysis of bacterial communities.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Victoria Bourgeais**, post-doctorante, équipe Arobas au laboratoire IBISC, Univ. Paris-Saclay: *Interpretable AI models for personalized medicine.* </span>  <a name="Bourgeais2023"></a> 

Deep learning has been a significant advance in Artificial Intelligence in recent years. The main advantage of this approach is that it automatically constructs a new non-linear hierarchical representation of the data, allowing it to solve a prediction task efficiently. Its main domains of interest are image analysis and natural language processing. One of the major future challenges of this approach is its application to healthcare. One main obstacle is its lack of interpretability. This model type is considered a "black box", as any explanations do not accompany their predictions. However, to use it in practice, particularly in sensitive fields such as healthcare, interpretation is necessary for several reasons. Understanding why a phenotype has been predicted is necessary to ensure that the prediction is based on reliable representations of the patients rather than on irrelevant artifacts present in the training data. Regardless of the model's effectiveness, this will affect any end user's decisions and confidence in the model. On the other hand, interpretation could contribute to biological discovery by identifying new signatures in the data relevant to the predictions.
In the IBISC laboratory (Université Paris-Saclay, Univ Evry), we develop new interpretation methods of deep learning models for personalized medicine integrating biological knowledge from ontologies (e.g., Gene Ontology) to make explanations intelligible to different users. This integration can be done both a posteriori and a priori. In my presentation, I will focus on a priori integration, where the architecture of the methods is defined from one or several knowledge databases. A neuron represents a biological concept, and the connections between neurons correspond to the relations between the concepts. The methods that will be presented have been evaluated on diagnostic tasks using real gene expression datasets and have shown their competitiveness against state-of-the-art, non-interpretable machine learning methods. We can explain a patient's prediction by identifying the biomarkers and biological concepts mobilized in the prediction calculation.

Reference: Bourgeais, V., Zehraoui, F., & Hanczar, B. (2022). GraphGONet : A self-explaining neural network encapsulating the Gene Ontology graph for phenotype prediction on gene expression. Bioinformatics, btac147. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac147

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Vincent Martin**: *Voice biomarkers for digital psychiatry : the lessons of a missed rendez-vous.* </span>  <a name="Martin2023"></a> 

This presentation begins with the story of a missed rendez-vous between informatics and psychiatry: while significant efforts are being made to develop speech biomarkers for psychiatric disorders, they are not as central to clinical practice in psychiatry as informaticians imagine. 
Estimating clinical symptoms and signs with speech biomarkers, on the other hand, could change the way patients are managed and improve care pathways, offering the opportunity for a second rendez-vous between the two disciplines -- hopefully a happy one this time. 
Through the example of sleepiness, this presentation tells the different questions raised by this problem at the frontier between clinical and computer science, and the perspectives that remain to be explored. 

This presentation is open to all and requires absolutely no prior knowledge of psychiatry.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Rayan Chikhi**, CR CNRS, group leader Institut Pasteur, Paris:  *Sequence bioinformatics at large scale: petabase-scale sequence alignment catalyses viral discovery.* </span>  <a name="Chikhi2023"></a> 

Petabytes of valuable sequencing data reside in public repositories, doubling in size every two years. They contain a wealth of genetic information about viruses that would help us monitor spillovers and anticipate future pandemics. We recently developed a bioinformatics cloud infrastructure, named Serratus, to perform petabase-scale sequence alignment. With it we analyzed all available RNA-seq samples (5.7 million samples, 10 petabytes) and discovered 10x more RNA viruses than previously known, including a new family of coronaviruses (Edgar et al, Nature, 2022). In this talk, I will present the computational infrastructure and some of the biological analyses.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Florence Bansept**; group leader à CENTURI Turing Center for Living Systems, Université Aix-Marseille :  *Evolution in biphasic life cycles.* </span>  <a name="Bansept2023"></a> 

Microbial communities extend the host functional repertoire, thus making the host and its associated microbes a functional unit. We are only beginning to decipher how host and microbe fitnesses are intertwined: while it is now clear that the microbiota has a vast potential to affect the host physiology, less focus has been put to the microbial perspective, i.e. to understand what benefit or cost can microbes retrieve from their interaction with their host. In contrast to the common hypotheses of strong and continued coevolution proposed to explain the emergence of such elaborate symbioses, we focus here on the steps that can lead a microbial population to transition from a free-living life-style to an association with a host. In particular, we aim at understanding what selection pressures apply to microbes following a biphasic life cycle, in which they can regularly transit in and outside a host.

We study three simple models of such biphasic life cycles. In the first model, we study a homogeneous microbial population transiting between a host and its environment and perform a sensitivity analysis to show the existence of two different regimes: one where the effect of migration from the environment to the host dominates, and a second where the within-host replication rate matters most. The second model is an SI-inspired compartmental model, which accounts for the habitats’ dynamics. We show that microbial propagation across habitats depends on the product of the transmissibilities, which we propose as a new holistic measure of microbial fitness - bearing similitudes with the R0 of epidemiology. In the third model, we combine microbial population and habitats dynamics and derive predictions that are consistent with experimental observations of an increased ability to form biofilms in bacteria evolved in biphasic conditions with C. elegans. 

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Hervé Fleury**, professeur honoraire, Université de Bordeaux et CNRS: *Virus émergents et ré-émergents (Elsevier/Masson éditeur).* </span>  <a name="Fleury2023"></a>  

A l’occasion de la sortie du livre « Virus émergents et ré-émergents « , nous aurons le plaisir d’accueillir son auteur:  Hervé JA Fleury, professeur honoraire, université de Bordeaux et CNRS. Ce séminaire grand public, en lien direct avec son nouveau livre, abordera l’ensemble des virus émergents et ré-émergents, comprenant Les virus transmis et non transmis par des insectes. Une attention particulière sera également consacrée aux addiférents chapitres comprenant les techniques du diagnostic virologique (PCR, séquençage), les accidents de laboratoire et les expériences de « Gain of function » (comme celles réalisées sur la grippe aviaire H5N1 et qui ont entrainé une polémique au plus haut niveau des USA), Les dernières connaissances de la communauté scientifique en lien avec la grippe aviaire et le SARS CoV 2  seront abordées pour conclure sur les Hypothèses pour les prochaines pandémies.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Auguste Caen**, chercheur postdoctoral, INRAE: *Modelling the role of microbiota in the acquisition and transmission of antibiotic resistant pathogenic bacteria.* </span> <a name="Caen2023"></a>  

The human microbiota has been shown to play a crucial role in human health, particularly in immune function [1]. The colonization of a host by infectious microorganisms depends on interactions within the microbiota, including competition or synergistic relationships [2]. Staphylococcus aureus, a commensal bacterium in humans, can lead to various diseases, especially with antibiotic-resistant strains. Our objective is to model the role of microbiota in the acquisition and transmission of antibiotic-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.

To achieve this, we have access to data from the iBird project [3], which allows us to design and calibrate such a model. The iBird study monitored the spread of S. aureus among patients and staff in a hospital over several months, using nasal sampling campaigns and recording physical interactions between individuals. We analyze this data to categorize individuals based on S. aureus colonization and interactions, in order to select samples for sequencing to determine nasal microbiota composition.

The considered model to describe the dynamics of nasal microbiota is the Generalized Lotka-Volterra model, which is particularly interesting in this context due to its ability to model interactions among microbial populations. However, this model requires abundance data, while metagenomic analyses, which quantify microbiota composition, provide only "frequency" data, indicating the proportion of each population present. Currently, addressing this challenge involves using imprecise proxies for total microbiota abundance [4] or making strong assumptions about the system, such as assuming a fixed total abundance . Applying this model to microbiota data without such assumptions is a significant challenge. Therefore, we analytically characterize the identifiability conditions of the Generalized Lotka-Volterra model on frequency data and demonstrate that identifiability is possible in the general case without requiring strong assumptions.

Schenck, L. P. et al. FEBS letters 590.21 (2016): 3705-3720. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12455
Man, W. H., et al. Nature Reviews Microbiology 15.5 (2017): 259-270. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro.2017.14
Obadia, T., et al. infection control & hospital epidemiology 36.8 (2015): 922-929. doi: 10.1017/ice.2015.89
Gloor, Gregory B., et al. "Microbiome datasets are compositional: and this is not optional." Frontiers in microbiology 8 (2017): 2224.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Galadriel Brière**, postdoctorante au MMG à Marseille: *Random Walk with Restart on multilayer networks: from node prioritisation to supervised link prediction and beyond.* </span> <a name="Briere2023"></a>  

Biological networks have proven invaluable ability for representing biological knowledge. Multilayer networks, which gather different types of nodes and edges in multiplex, heterogeneous and bipartite networks, provide a natural way to integrate diverse and multi-scale data sources into a common framework. Recently, we developed MultiXrank, a Random Walk with Restart algorithm able to explore such multilayer networks. MultiXrank outputs scores reflecting the proximity between an initial set of seed node(s) and all the other nodes in the multilayer network. We illustrate here the versatility of bioinformatics tasks that can be performed using MultiXrank, from node prioritisation to supervised link prediction and beyond.

## 2022

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Mathieu Raffinot**, CR CNRS BKB, LaBRI, Bordeaux: *No more Boyer-Moore ! Quite old algorithmic string matching stuff but not so well known.* </span> <a name="Raffinot2022"></a>

 In this talk, I will give a short review of the algorithms for finding the exact word in a text, highlighting the historical evolution of the context in which they were created and why. Most of the time it is already old material (in the scale of computer science), but it seems to be little known; proof of this is that the Boyer-Moore algorithm has been put in the program of the final option of NSI, whereas it should rationally not be used anymore, since we know how to make it faster and even optimal on average, simpler to understand and to code, and more extensible! Also I will mention the very little known results on this subject of Gilles Didier (CNRS, LIRMM) of 2015 which seem to close at least the theoretical research on the precise subject, but there are always surprises in this field, mainly in France, a country in which the inertia of academic research in computer science is very strong in spite of the rapid evolution of practical needs and techniques.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Simon Labarthe**, CR INRAe, Villenave d'Ornon:  *Modeling the gut microbiota from metagenomic data.* </span> <a name="Labarthe2022"></a>

The human gut harbors a complex bacterial community, the gut microbiota, that maintains a symbiotic relationship with its host: the microbiota ecology is then linked to the host’s health. This microbial community is usually studied in vivo through metagenomic data, i.e. counts ofmicrobial genes taken randomly in the mixture of the genomes of the microbes composing the microbiota. Mathematical models of the microbial population dynamics are a promising tool to study microbiota fate and models able to simulate metagenomic data comparable to biological experiments would be an important step for model validation enhancement. 
Different levels of gut microbiota modeling are introduced. Functional metagenomic data are analyzed through non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to identify metabolic profiles that are interpreted as functional potential of microbial meta-populations. Metabolic models of the meta-populations are built to predict the metabolite consumptions and the growth rates, and are plugged to a PDE population dynamics model to account for the interactions between the bacterial populations and the intestinal environment. Conversely, the model outputs can be interpreted as synthetic metagenomic counts that can be compared to experimental data. 

This work is a collaboration with B. Laroche, and with M. Ribot, B. Polizzi, T. Phan and T. Goudon for the population/fluid dynamics of the microbiota and its environment, and with L. Darrigade and M.Leclerc for the metapopulation construction.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Mathieu Raffinot**, CR CNRS BKB, LaBRI, Bordeaux: *Algorithme BNDM.* </span> <a name="Raffinot2022.2"></a>

In this presentation, which follows the previous one on word-in-text search [here](#Raffinot2022), I will focus this time on the BNDM algorithm for exact word-in-text or gene sequence search, which is the most efficient and simple generic algorithm. It is optimal on average and easily extendable to search with character classes and approximated to k errors.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Pierre Marijon** , IR, SeqOIA, Lille: *From assembly graph to pangenome graphe.* </span>  <a name="Marijon2022"></a>

Genome assembly is a well known problem in bioinformatics, it generally relies on the construction of an assembly graph (a string graph) which allows to represent the information of the sequenced reads, the nodes are reads and the arcs represent an overlap between two reads. The assembly tools focus on the construction of this assembly graph and then search in this graph for a path that would correspond to the original genome.

A pangenome graph is a string graph that allows to represent in a single data structure the known variations in genome of a species. This structure is useful because it allows to represent all the variants together and in relation to each other, to better understand them but also to detect variants in other variants. Algorithms to build pangenome graphs are under development but still rely on the use of reference genomes.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Kim-Anh Lê Cao**, professeure et chercheuse à l'Université de Melbourne (School of Mathematics and Statistics, Melbourne Integrative Genomics), invitée à l'INRAe Toulouse: *Building atlases to benchmark transcriptomics studies.* </span> <a name="Cao2022"></a>

With the advent of new sequencing technologies, we face the issue of data obsolescence. Who uses microarray or bulk RNA-seq data, when all the hype is about single cell RNA-seq? We do!

In the first part of this presentation, I will summarise our past research attempting to re-use bulk transcriptomics data from the community to try answer three questions:

- How can I compare the expression of my genes of interest across multiple and independent transcriptomics studies to validate my results?
- How can I combine multiple and independent transcriptomics data sets to identify a platform-agnostic signature?
- How can I build transcriptomics atlases to benchmark my own study?

 In the second part of the presentation, I will present our recent computational and statistical framework, Sincast* (SINgle-cell data CASTing onto reference) to annotate cell identity from single cell RNA-seq from bulk RNA-seq reference atlases. We solve structural discrepancies between bulk and single cell data by either aggregating or imputing single cells and discuss the most beneficial approach depending on the data context. Sincast can also be used to reveal intermediate single cell states when projected against bulk data.

I will also briefly discuss the benefit of using hackathon data to advance methods development in multi-omics single cell. 

This is some joint work with my PhD student Yidi Deng and Dr Jarny Choi (Centre for Stem Cell Systems, University of Melbourne)

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Pablo Ugalde Salas**: post-doctorantt dans l’équipe Pléiade, INRIA, Bordeaux: Metamodelling of *Dynamic Flux Balance Analysis.* </span>  <a name="Salas2022"></a>

Flux balance analysis (FBA) allows us to predict the uptake and production rates of different metabolites and molecules of interest. FBA consists of a set of linear constraints describing the reactions encoded in the genome coupled with an objective function, thus creating a linear program (LP) very efficiently tackled by available solvers. The nutritional environment which affects what and how much a cell can produce and grow is defined through the constraints of a FBA model. Dynamic flux balance analysis (dFBA) allows to consider the inherent temporal dimension of cells as entities immersed in a medium which changes through time either by the cell's own metabolic activity or by the flows of matter and energy through the environment. Community dFBA models can be obtained by coupling different dFBA models by their nutrient use.

Community dFBA consists of a set of differential equations with state variables that include both metabolites and cells populations concentrations through time, whose dynamics are described by reaction and exchange rates. Some of these rates are given by the state-dependent result of the FBA model of the different cell populations involved in the community. Numerically, solving a system of differential equations implies the computation of at least one FBA per population per time step. Even though LP are numerically very efficiently solved, a batch of LP problems can prove computationally expensive impairing computational exploration of the model.
 
In order to speed-up computations we propose a metamodelling technique based on Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS) that approximates the relationship between inputs and outputs of the FBA models. A learning database was assembled from the FBA outputs and nutrient concentrations obtained from several simulations of the dFBA. This input-output dependence is approximated by projection in an RKHS, which is done in an offline manner. We chose a specific RKHS space, the ANOVA-RKHS, which allows to perform variable selection, inducing additional speed-up .
 
We used an example based on the modelling of Salmonella infection of the colon where two FBA are involved in the differential equations. Replacing the FBA models by their metamodels in the community dFBA speeds up computations by a factor of 45, with a total relative error for the dFBA state variables maintained below 5%.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Pascal Martin**, IR, INRAe, Villenave d'Ornon: *GeneNeighborhood: an R package to explore the direct neighbors of your favorite gene set.* </span> <a name="Martin2022"></a>

It is increasingly recognized that the organization of the genomes in terms of gene orientations and intergenic distances is not random but rather reflects complex interactions between genes, especially adjacent ones. Studies of correlated gene expression and regulation, together with the analysis of phylogenetic conservations by comparative genomics have defined large expression "neighborhoods" in multiple genomes, likely under the influence of chromatin domains and 3D genome organization.

In addition, advances in DNA sequencing have shown that large fractions of the genomes are actually transcribed. Pervasive transcription of the genome and the existence of large scale positional patterns of gene co-expression raise the question of how adjacent genes might interact, interfere or be insulated from each other. However, apart from a few examples such as tandem gene duplications or bidirectional promoters, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms influencing how adjacent genes interact is still limited.

While studying a novel family of negative transcription elongation factors in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, we uncovered their unexpected role in protecting the downstream genes of tandem gene pairs from transcriptional interferences. This study motivated the development of the R package “GeneNeighborhood” designed to explore the direct neighbors of any set of pre-defined genes.

I will present the motivations behind the development of this package and illustrate the statistical and graphical summaries that it provides.

## 2021

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Arnaud Belcour**, doctorant dans l’équipe Dyliss INRIA Rennes: *Estimating the metabolic capacity of a community from taxonomic assignations.* </span>  <a name="Belcour2021"></a>

In this talk, I will present two methods for elucidating which organisms in a microbial community are associated with a specific metabolic function. Microbial community samples can be described by sequencing gene markers (such as the 16S rRNA gene), which are assigned to specific taxon using gene-sequence alignment methods. Although some functional profiles can be associated with these taxa, there is a lack of methods for estimating the metabolic capacity of a community from the taxonomic assignations of a metagenomics sample, preventing the study of the metabolic dynamics of microbial communities.

The first method I developed estimates which proteins are likely to be associated with a taxonomic assignation from gene markers, using queries on the Uniprot database. Once these proteins have been extracted, their functional annotations are used to produce a draft metabolic network for the taxon. The second method, Metage2Metabo, aims at finding the key species that collaborate within the community with respect to the realization of an expected phenotype. Using constraint programming, this method processes large-scale datasets of microbial or taxon metabolic networks to highlight putative exchanges within the community and calculate the organisms involved in the production of metabolites of interest.

These two methods were combined to analyze microbial community data related to a biogas plant. By combining database interrogation, system biology, and sequence analysis, I will illustrate how our methods allow finding key community members associated with specific steps of the methanogenesis.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Sylvain Prigent**, CR INRAE, Villenave d’Ornon: *Using a machine learning approach to predict Maize yield from metabolomic data.* </span>  <a name="Prigent2021"></a>

The metabolome correspond to the measurement of a large number of metabolites within a biological extract. It is often seen as the ultimate phenotype, resulting from all biochemical processes taking place in an organism. Such a phenotype could thus contribute to the prediction of yield, and give insight into how genetic differences in phenotype arise. In this presentation, I will describe how the analysis of molecules present in maize leaves grown in a greenhouse under two conditions (drought stress or control) can serve to estimate grain yield of maize plants grown in different fields. 

Targeted and untargeted metabolite analysis were performed on 211 genotypes of maize plants grown in greenhouses under both well-watered and drought conditions, yielding data for 11 major metabolites and 1,412 metabolite signatures. Beside this analysis, grain yield were collected from the same genotypes in 15 different fields across Europe. Generalised linear models (ridge, elastic net and lasso regression) were then used to link metabolic patterns to plant performance. 

The proposed models were able to perform good predictions with correlations around +0.65 between measured and predicted yield. Interestingly, the best yield predictions were obtained for well-watered fields based on metabolomic data gathered from stressed plants, giving inputs that designing experiments with increasing stresses might improve predictions. By incorporating field specific information, the models were also able to predict quite precisely field-specific yields for the different genotypes.

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Domitille Chalopin-Fillot** , Postdoctorante ImmunoConcept et CBiB, Bordeaux: *Detecting molecular changes in independent adaptation to xeric life in rodents.* </span> <a name="Chalopin2021"></a>

Rodents are fascinating world-widely distributed mammals able to live in the harshest places on Earth, such as deserts. Adaptation to desert life occurred numerous times independently in rodents, involving many morphological, physiological and behavioral adaptations. The availability of multiple genomes and transcriptomes makes them a great model to perform large-scale high-throughput analyses. This may help understanding the molecular mechanisms of parallel evolution, the speed at which species can adapt and finally from a physiological point of view adaptations in changing environments. The objective of the current study is to highlight the changes of gene sequences and expression in kidney allowing rodents to survive without regular access to water. In this context, we use online genome and kidney transcriptome data from 34 species, containing groups of closely related species living either in xeric (<300 mm of water per year) or mesic environments, spread across the different rodent families. Within this large amount of data, we combine protocols to detect convergent changes in both gene sequences and expression at different depth of the rodent tree. Kidney contains different cell types varying in number and thus contributing to global gene expression to different extents. To evaluate whether all cell types change in gene expression in xeric environment or only certain types, we use deconvolution methods. Finally, to understand whether the same genes are involved in plastic response and long-term adaptation, we compare these results to genes responding to dehydration experiments. This allows us to refine the molecular processes of adaptation and biological processes in which kidneys support the scarcity of water. For the first time in rodent and mammals, we combine gene sequences and gene expression analyses at different levels on a large dataset of species to provide insights on crucial evolutionary questions.

## 2020

<span style="color:#dc2f57;"> **Clémence Frioux**, CR INRIA, Bordeaux : *Gap-filling metabolism: from systems biology to microbial systems ecology.* </span> <a name="frioux2020"></a> 

Metabolic networks (MN) are important tools to analyse the physiology of organisms. Their reconstruction from omics data involves automatic steps and curation. The latter aims at filling gaps in the networks, thereby ensuring models derived from MN will reproduce biological observations. I will present the impact of various algorithms to fill those gaps and a solution to reconcile two main metabolic modeling semantics in a new algorithm. In a second part, I will describe how the selection of communities in microbiotas can be seen as a extension of metabolic gap-filling and can be solved with combinatorial optimisation problems. 

